---
layout: post
title: Trie-ing to Display Code
date: 2023-12-10 01:30:00
description: Implementing a Trie in Python. 
tags: data-structures
categories: code-posts
featured: true
---
This is an experimental Markdown file where I experiment with including code in the future for more serious/flavored posts. For fun, let us implement a classic data structure that supports string prefix search and insertion (in linear time). [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trie) does an execellent job for an introduction.

{% highlight python linenos %}

def TrieNode():
    """ A node in the Trie, contains a list of children. """
    self.links = {}
    self.end = False
def Trie():
    """ 
        A Trie data structure that can achieve:
        => O(n): insertion
        => O(n): search
        => O(n*k): space, where k is constant, the number of 
                   strings stored in the Trie.
    """
    def __init__(self):
        self.root = TrieNode()
    def insert(self, word):
        """ 
            Adds a word into the Trie.
        """
        r = self.root
        for ch in word:
            if ch not in r.links:
                r.links[ch] = TrieNode()
            # keep inserting other characters
            r = r.links[ch]
        # mark end of word
        r.end = True
    def search(self, word):
        """ 
            Returns a boolean signifying whether `word` exists
            in the Trie.
        """
        r = self.root
        for ch in word:
            if ch not in r.links:
                return False
            else:
                # traverse down the Trie
                r = r.links[ch]
        # check if word ended
        return r.end

    def prefix(self, p):
        """ 
            Check if a string in the Trie exists with prefix 
            `p`.
        """
        r = self.root
        for ch in p:
            if ch not in r.links:
                return False
            r = r.links[ch]
        # unlike `search()`, no need to check word ended.
        return True

    def lcp(self):
        """ 
            Returns the longest common prefix of all words 
            currently stored in the trie.
        """
        res = ""
        r = self.root
        while r:
            # if more than 1 link, means they do not share a
            # common char, break
            if len(r.links) > 1 or r.end:
                return res
            ch = list(r.links.keys())[0]
            res += ch
            r = r.links[ch]
        return res

{% endhighlight %}

Hopefully I implemented this correctly (it's 2 am now, the probability of making mistakes increases in time exponentially ...), "trie" it yourself by copying the above code and testing on some words.

```python
# input
words = ["hello", "hell", "helloworld", "helium"]
t = Trie()
for word in words:
    t.insert(word)
print(t.lcp()) # should return 'hel'
```

---